But now,
we’re moving to a part of our program
we’ve truly grown to love.
It’s entitled The Inside Story,
and Brother Trent Lippold will be our host.
So let’s give Brother Lippold
our attention as he presents this:
The Inside Story.
Welcome to another edition
of The Inside Story.
Today, we’re going to meet
four guests from three continents,
representing the 148th class of Gilead.
We’re going to hear stories of isolation,
a remarkable gift, and obedience.
In each case,
we will see different faces of integrity.
Curious?
Well, let’s meet our first guests then,
Salvador and Isabel Domingos from Angola.
Welcome, Isabel.
Thank you.
Please, Salvador, welcome.
Yes, again, welcome.
So you’re both from Angola,
serving in the branch.
Sister Isabel,
what is your assignment in the branch?
I work in the Translation Department.
I do composition
for one of our vernacular languages.
OK, which language is it?
I work with the Chokwe language.
Chokwe?
Yes.
All right.
How do you say “Watchtower”  in Chokwe?
Kaposhi wa Kutalila.
But, you know, Brother Lippold,
we don’t need to learn
the language to do composition
because it’s a technical process.
Well, thank you for learning
to say “The Watchtower”  anyway.
Good.
And Brother Salvador,
what is your assignment?
I work in the Service Department
with the Preaching Needs Desk,
and I also give support to the branch office.
OK, the Preaching Needs Desk in Angola
—what’s the preaching like in Angola?
Well,
the preaching work in Angola is wonderful.
We have been seeing
the fulfillment of Haggai 2:7.
Jehovah is “shaking the nation.”
Many people are coming into the truth.
And since people
respond well to the good news,
we usually say that Angola is a paradise
for all publishers
but especially for pioneers.
OK, so He’s “shaking” Angola.
Yes.
So how many are coming in in Angola?
Well, right now we have
more than 165,000 publishers
and more than 720,000 Bible studies.
Seven hundred
and twenty thousand Bible studies?
Yes, more than that.
More than?
That is absolutely amazing!
Yes.
Isabel, with the kind of growth
that you have in Angola,
what touches your heart about this?
What touches me most is seeing
young ones come into the truth
—young ones who are
at seven, eight, nine, ten years old.
They start studying the Bible.
They start going to the meetings,
and many of them without their parents,
and they make progress in the truth.
They start preaching with the congregation.
They get baptized.
And some of them,
they start working as auxiliary pioneers.
So this is something amazing to see.
This really touches my heart.
That’s beautiful, yeah.
And Salvador, for you,
when you look at the growth,
how does it affect you?
What touches you?
Seeing how Jehovah has been blessing
the work in our branch territory,
it’s something amazing.
For example, I remember when I was invited
for the first time to attend a meeting.
That meeting was held in a brother’s home,
and we used a bedroom
as a place to hold the meeting
because we were under ban.
But sometime later,
since more people were coming,
we needed to move
from that bedroom in the same house
to the dining room.
And some months later,
with more people coming
(there was a little bit more freedom),
we needed to move
from that dining room to the courtyard.
Same house?
The same house.
OK.
And from that time on,
many congregations in Angola
started using courtyards of brothers’ homes
to hold meetings.
But now the situation
is completely different.
So seeing the transition
from the courtyard of a brother’s home
to a nice Kingdom Hall
built with the help of Jehovah’s organization
is something that touched my heart
—seeing how Jehovah takes care
of his people
by means of his organization.
That’s beautiful.
So, what is the situation like
with Kingdom Halls in Angola?
Well, right now
we have many congregations
that are sharing one Kingdom Hall.
For example,
in one Kingdom Hall with one auditorium
there are 10, 11, 13.
Even right now,
we received information about a Kingdom Hall
where there are 14 congregations using it.
So we have a huge need
for more Kingdom Halls in Angola.
Would you say that’s one
of the biggest needs right now in Angola?
Yes, since many people
are coming into the truth,
theocratic facilities
are a big need in Angola.
We need space in Bethel;
we need more Assembly Halls;
we need a facility for SKE,
and especially Kingdom Halls.
OK, yes.
And we have a video that shows
the big need for Kingdom Halls
that we have in Angola.
You will enjoy seeing this video.
OK, excellent. Let’s watch it.
On the southwest coast of Africa
sits Angola
—home to lush jungle hillsides,
vast desert plains,
and tropical Atlantic beaches.
But even more beautiful
is the love that the people of Angola
demonstrate for Bible truths.
The growth rate of Kingdom proclaimers
has vastly outpaced
Kingdom Hall construction,
with some Kingdom Halls hosting
as many as 14 congregations.
Imagine the coordination challenges
this creates for the publishers
and for the bodies of elders.
To accommodate all the weekend meetings
that must take place,
some begin at 6:30 in the morning
and they continue to be held all day long.
For midweek meetings,
some congregations
must start early in the afternoon.
Supporting these schedules
could potentially jeopardize
our brothers’ employment.
Therefore, they prayerfully negotiate
with their employers to get off work
one or two hours early
on meeting days.
The later meetings that follow
can last well into the night.
The elders cooperate
so that everyone can get the best.
They decide that the congregation
that stays far from the Kingdom Hall
has priority to choose
the right time for them,
so that they can feel comfortable
because of the distance.
Once the Kingdom Hall is full,
the congregation spills outside the building,
forming lines at the windows.
In all cases,
our dear brothers and sisters
lovingly put the needs and welfare of others
ahead of their own.
With the building in constant use,
when do the congregations schedule time
for maintenance and cleaning?
It takes careful coordination
under the direction
of the Kingdom Hall Maintenance Committee
to ensure that the building stays
clean, safe,
and very comfortable.
Our brothers and sisters in Angola
are “aglow with the spirit” and cooperate
together in beautiful ways,
providing a witness to all onlookers
that Jehovah is
a God of order and peace.
Thank you.
I mean, that was very, very interesting.
When I look at the flexibility
and the cooperation
of the brothers and sisters in Angola
with the Kingdom Hall,
I will appreciate whatever meeting time
our congregation is assigned.
It’s just so beautiful to see the spirit
of preaching in Angola.
Many brothers “step over”
into unassigned territories,
and others go to seldom-worked territory
to help congregations with fewer publishers.
That is why, for example, Brother Lippold,
last service year
we had 20 new circuits
—last service year.
Twenty.
Yes.
This service year, from September until now,
we have already . . .
Should I hold on?
. . . we have already 97 new congregations.
Ninety-seven?
Yes.
That’s almost a hundred new congregations
in just a few months.
Yes.
That is a tremendous, tremendous spirit,
just to see the obedience of the brothers
and sisters in Angola for preaching.
What a beautiful example for all of us!
Well, thank you both for being here
and sharing these experiences with us
and the spirit of the brothers
and sisters in Angola.
Thank you.
Thank you so much.
Let’s introduce our next guest.
It’s Brother Ho Chong from Korea.
Welcome, Ho.
Thank you.
Nice to have you on The Inside Story.
Thank you very much.
So Brother Chong,
you are serving in the Korea branch.
And what is your assignment?
I work with the Legal Department.
And last year,
our branch renovated
the historical museum of our branch,
and I had the privilege
to participate in the project
—especially working with the “Integrity”
section of the historical museum—
with two other brothers.
And we had very encouraging experiences.
Very nice.
Integrity, Korea
—we think of young brothers
and conscientious objection.
Is that what the “Integrity” part
of the museum is about?
Yeah.
To renovate the section,
brothers and sisters
were invited to donate
meaningful historical artifacts.
So we received a lot
of valuable items from them.
One of them was very, very special to us.
What was it?
It was a photograph
that we received
from a special pioneer brother.
This is the photo.
Very interesting.
Brother Lippold, what do you think?
What is this picture, and where was it taken?
Well, it obviously looks like at a military
—some kind of military place.
It looks like a young brother.
He’s being offered a uniform,
and this is him refusing
the military uniform.
Yeah, that’s right.
It was in a military camp.
It is not a reenactment;
it is a real situation.
Brothers in Korea were forcefully taken
to the military camp for enlistment,
sometimes from home
and sometimes even from the Kingdom Halls.
And as we can see in this picture,
they were forced
to take arms to be a soldier.
So this is not—
He has not been brought from court
or anything like that.
Right on the spot
he has to take his stand for Jehovah.
Yes, that’s right.
So you said that a special pioneer
sent the photograph.
How did he get the photo?
Actually, this photo was taken in 1988
by a military police investigator.
He wanted to use this photo as evidence
to charge this brother.
But he was so touched by his firm standing,
he kept this photo for almost 20 years.
And in 2007,
the special pioneer visited him
during the house-to-house ministry.
He gave this photo to him,
even recalling the name of the brother,
and he said,
“Please give this back to him.”
Wow!
So when you received the photograph
(you and the other two brothers),
when you saw it for the first time,
what did you think?
We all just agreed that it is a gift.
It is a special gift from Jehovah.
Without him, it is impossible.
Just the existence
of this photo is impossible,
and it has been kept for almost 20 years.
And then through the special pioneer,
we have it.
It’s also impossible.
Why did you feel so strongly
that it’s impossible?
We didn’t take this picture.
The investigator took it, and he kept it.
And now we have it.
But the timing is also very important
because it’s
after the two monumental decisions
in the highest courts,
and then
all the imprisoned brothers were released,
and then we now have this photo.
So this was just last year in 2019?
Yes.
So we thought
that Jehovah was commending
all the brothers who did their best,
according to their Bible-trained conscience,
to keep their integrity.
And Jehovah was saying:
“I still remember your integrity.
Thank you so much.”
We felt that way.
It’s very powerful.
I can feel that also.
Were you able to find the brother?
Yes, we did.
He is now serving as an elder.
He has three children.
He never expected
that he would see this picture.
He knew that it was taken.
He knew the photograph was taken?
Yes.
And he remembered the investigator
because he was favorable to him,
and he relayed
one encouraging story about him.
The investigator, for his work,
attended the convention in 1988.
Our convention?
Yes, for his work.
And then he received a book.
Do you remember the book,
the Revelation  book?
In 1988.
Yes, and he gave this book to this brother.
In the camp?
Yes.
And he said:
“Maybe here you may be relaxed.
“Maybe in prison it is more severe.
Just enjoy this book.”
That is unbelievable.
Yeah.
So he missed the convention but . . .
. . . he got the release.
Yes.
That’s quite a story.
So, what happened when the photo was shown?
What was the response of his children?
They were all surprised at this.
The eldest son was surprised
because his father
was always happy and smiling,
but he was so serious in this picture.
So he was able to understand
how determined his father was
in order to keep his integrity
And the second son found out
that his father looked very similar.
So the two looked alike,
the younger son and the father.
Yeah.
So he found himself in this photo.
So all the family members
were able to visualize
what it would be like in keeping integrity.
And it was really encouraging to all of them.
Well, I think it’s really true
what the younger son has said
about seeing himself in this picture
because in many ways
it is him in this picture.
And it’s you in this picture,
and it’s me in this picture.
It’s all of us
—when we take our stand for Jehovah
and when we’re loyal to him—
whether it’s a young person in school
not saluting the flag,
or not participating
in a false religious holiday
with worldly relatives,
or at work
(again not participating in things)
taking a stand for Jehovah.
So, really, Ho,
this is a gift for all of Jehovah’s people
to remind us of what it means
to show our integrity
and be loyal to Jehovah.
Thank you very, very much
for sharing this with us.
Thank you very much.
Well, let’s meet our next guest.
He’s from Chile, and his name is Allen Kim.
It’s nice to have you on The Inside Story.
Thank you very much for inviting me.
So, Brother Kim,
you were born in Chile and raised in Chile?
Actually, I was born in Chile,
but I was raised in Brazil,
and then we moved to Chile.
And my parents are Korean.
OK.
Did you speak Spanish
when you came back to Chile?
I had to learn Spanish, yes.
When did you come back to Chile?
I was about 14 years old
when I moved with my family.
OK, so, what was that like
—fourteen years old, you speak Portuguese
and then coming to Chile
and having to learn Spanish?
It wasn’t easy at first
because Chile is not a country
that was used to receiving many foreigners.
So just seeing our family,
an Asian-looking family,
caught much attention in Chile.
So when we were walking on the streets
or going to a store,
many people used to look at us, point at us,
and also talk about us.
We had some bad experiences also.
Hmm.
So as a young person,
how did that make you feel?
As a teenager,
you know that it’s not easy to receive
that kind of treatment in some places.
And also added to that,
you have to be acquainted with their food
—it’s a new place, a new culture.
So you have a problem of identity
because you are in one country,
but you have another culture,
you were raised in another culture.
So it wasn’t easy to find myself—my place.
So sometimes even among many people,
you can feel a little bit isolated
and that you don’t belong anywhere.
Hmm, that’s interesting.
Probably a lot of people
(a lot of brothers and sisters even)
can relate to what you’re saying,
sometimes feeling that way
and not being sure
where you fit in for various reasons.
What changed for you?
Yes, a big help was association
with brothers and sisters.
I especially remember
that our congregation was invited
to attend a special international convention
in Chile in 2003.
And that was a very special moment
because it was my first time
at such a big event of Jehovah’s Witnesses
and seeing brothers
from all around the world.
No one was judging you
by your looks or having differences.
Just being there and seeing
everyone happy and united
—that was a very big moment for me.
And I could understand well
that this is really Jehovah’s organization.
This is the place I should be.
OK, we have a picture here of you.
This is at the international convention?
That’s right.
That was the same year
that we arrived to Chile,
and it’s my family
attending at that location.
OK, very nice.
You’ve changed your hair since then.
Yes.
So you found your place now
in the congregation
and things really started
to progress for you?
Yes, as I started to progress spiritually,
I would meet many brothers and sisters.
That was a big help for me.
For example,
I remember one single brother
that was from our congregation,
a Korean brother raised in Chile.
He went to MTS,
and he was assigned back to our congregation
with another Chilean brother,
and, well,
just seeing their example
and later
many other brothers’ examples helped me
to find my place in the organization.
So the congregation,
was this a Spanish congregation you were in?
It was a Korean congregation.
OK, so you’re in a Korean congregation,
and you had a Chilean-Korean brother
assigned to your congregation
together with a Chilean brother.
Did he speak Korean?
Yeah, he was learning Korean when he arrived.
He had to learn.
So the three of you, then,
you found that you made a good partnership.
Yes.
A really positive influence on you
—that’s absolutely beautiful.
So you’re working at the branch now in Chile?
Yes, I’m working at the Chile branch
in the Service Department.
I help in the Preaching Needs Desk.
OK, a bit like Salvador then,
the Preaching Needs Desk
—what’s the preaching like in Chile?
We have many places, remote areas,
especially in the southern part of Chile,
where territories are very big.
So brothers have to (sometimes they have to)
travel for many hours by car.
There are even places
that they can’t reach by car,
so the congregation
has to arrange a preaching campaign
that can be days
—seven days—
of walking, sleeping in tents,
and sometimes even washing
themselves in the river.
And they try to reach those places,
remote places, with two to three houses.
Wow, that sounds exciting!
The first photograph you’ve brought for us,
where is this?
This place is called Aysén Region.
And in this place,
the brothers have to drive for many hours
just to reach a small town
where a few people live
in these remote areas.
Good.
In the next photograph, where is this area?
Well, this is a southern part of Chile;
it’s called Araucanía Region.
And many people live there,
especially people that speak Mapudungun.
They also have many remote areas
that the brothers have to walk to reach.
OK, and the next photograph you have,
I mean, that’s quite appealing.
Yes, this is one of the most remote areas
in the most southern part of Chile,
and the brothers also arrange
to preach in those places.
This is called Torres del Paine.
Very nice.
It’s amazing to see the efforts
that the branch is making
to reach these really remote areas in Chile.
Yes, brothers and sisters are working hard
even to reach a few people.
So we can say
that they are doing a good work.
Good, yeah.
It’s very, very remote in these places.
So is that—?
This is in the most southern part of Chile.
Is that as far as you go?
Actually, this is not one
of the most remote areas.
We have other places
that are more isolated than that area.
I brought a video that I want to show you.
Do you want to see it?
Yes, please.
More than 2,000 miles
of open ocean separate Easter Island
from the west coast of South America.
Yet, even here on this remote island
with less than 8,000 inhabitants,
the good news of God’s Kingdom
is being preached.
And the publishers
in this seemingly isolated field
feel the full support
of Jehovah’s organization.
This Kingdom Hall and translation office
was built in 2016.
Here five brothers and sisters
work to translate spiritual food
into the native Polynesian language
of Rapa Nui,
ensuring that local publishers receive
the same spiritual food as their brothers
and sisters around the world.
Translation personnel receive benefit
from Bethel spiritual programs
despite being two time zones away
from the branch office in Santiago, Chile.
Here in the middle of the ocean,
I feel how Jehovah loves me
and gives me his strength.
Jehovah is taking care
of all of us on the island.
The Chile branch also supports
Kingdom publishers on Robinson Crusoe Island.
Although much closer to the mainland,
just over 400 miles away,
it’s more challenging to reach.
The journey involves
a flight and then a boat ride
from the isolated airport
to the inhabited part
of the island, which can only be traveled
when the seas aren’t too rough.
But despite these challenges,
our brothers and sisters
receive constant and timely spiritual food,
LDC support, and shepherding.
For years, Robinson Crusoe Island was home
to just five spiritual sisters.
With the help of the LDC,
a small Kingdom Hall
was remodeled
and a two-room apartment was added.
This made it possible
for two single elders
to move to the island,
where they now assist
with preaching and shepherding.
Although traveling here
is not for the faint of heart,
this congregation of eight publishers
receives a visit
from their circuit overseer twice a year.
The visit lasts for two
or three weeks each time,
providing extra spiritual support
to these faithful ones.
It doesn’t matter where you live,
if you are in the city,
in the countryside,
or even in a place like this
in the middle of the ocean,
Jehovah is with us.
Those who preach
and those who respond to the good news
receive abundant spiritual care,
resulting in a unified worldwide brotherhood
that praises our great God, Jehovah.
That’s beautiful, Allen,
to see the efforts that the branch is making
to care for brothers and sisters
on such remote islands.
And I thought it was
interesting as well that,
for example,
on Robinson Crusoe Island,
the circuit overseer
will stay there for two or three weeks
because it is so isolated.
Most of the time he spends two weeks
just to encourage
the brothers that are so isolated,
and sometimes
he even spends one additional week
(almost three weeks)
to combine with a circuit assembly.
OK, very nice, very nice.
So it’s a nice arrangement
that the branch has
to care for this particular island.
Yes.
And there’s another island
that circuit overseers
from Chile are visiting,
and that’s the Falkland Islands.
In this area,
we have an arrangement
to send a circuit overseer
to encourage the brothers and sisters.
That’s amazing, very nice.
I mean, you brothers in Chile,
you’re not afraid
of remote places, that’s for sure.
Yes.
Actually, these places that we just saw
are not the most remote areas.
We have one place
that we also reached a few years ago,
and that’s Antarctica,
as you can see in the photo.
You’re kidding me.
You mean the branch in Chile
has supported the work in Antarctica?
Yes.
I imagine it’s very difficult to get there.
Yes, it’s very hard
because first we need permission,
and we have to fly.
So the branch has to make
some arrangements
to reach a couple in that area.
Very nice.
Well, thank you very much, Allen.
Thank you for sharing
this information with us
and helping us to see
that even though we’re isolated,
we’re not alone.
Do you really feel like Chile is your home?
Yes, of course.
As you can see, Chile is a beautiful place
with many good brothers and sisters.
Also, it really doesn’t matter
where we are physically.
If we are with Jehovah and his organization,
we are in the great spiritual temple.
So we can feel—
Wherever we are, we can feel that’s our home.
Beautiful.
Thank you very much, Allen,
for sharing that with us.
Integrity has been described
as ‘wholehearted love for
‘and unbreakable devotion
to the Person of Jehovah,
so that his will comes first
in all of our decisions.’
And our guests today
have shown us different faces of integrity,
like obedience and cooperation
in preaching and meeting together
and maintaining loyalty
when you come face-to-face with tests.
And if you feel isolated
or are literally geographically isolated,
you can maintain
unbreakable devotion to Jehovah.
The psalmist wrote:
“If I would fly away
with the wings of the dawn
“to reside by the most remote sea,
“even there your hand would lead me
and your right hand would take hold of me.”
Clearly, Jehovah sees our acts of integrity,
and he loves us for it.
Please join us on another edition
of The Inside Story.
You would think that we have
about 500 here in the audience.
But that was again
a faith-strengthening program.
It’s amazing, some of the experiences
and things happening
in various parts of the earth.
What a treat that was!